The illusoryTLS Asymmetric Backdoor: August Dupin Meets the
Kleptographer Y


A submission by Alfonso De Gregorio (@secYOUre) to the 1st Underhanded
Crypto Contest


Category: Add a Backdoor


0. Abstract -- Backdoor is Data; Data is Backdoor
The common view is that backdoors are symmetric in nature and require 
the presence of malicious logic in the target system code base (i.e., 
everyone with knowledge about the internals of the backdoor can exploit
it and code review can spot their presence). This work challenges this
view. Backdoors can be asymmetric (i.e., the complete code for the 
backdoored system does not enable anyone except the designer to exploit
the backdoor) and be planted in data. Or: to paraphrase a popular quote
on homoiconicity of some programming languages, backdoor is data, data 
is backdoor.

To illustrate the security implications of this family of malicious
security artifacts this work:
  0. Provides a working implementation of a backdoor embedded into the
     RSA modulus of a Certification Authority public-key certificate 
     and the code for a minimalistic client and server communicating 
     over a TLS channel; 
  1. Shows how this backdoor can completely pervert the security 
     guarantees provided by the TLS protocol; 
  2. Argues that, from a network security perspective, the 
     architecture of illusoryTLS resembles the standard architecture
     of web browsers and the associated certificate stores, 
     communicating with web servers over TLS channels; and 
  3. Points out that even the presence of a single CA certificate 
     with a secretly embedded backdoor in the certificate store would
     render the entire TLS security fictional. In fact, the current 
     practice of universal implicit cross-certification makes the whole
     PKI as weak as its weakest link [AA14, Gu11].

Hence, as long as the implementations of RSA -- or, more generally,
algorithms vulnerable to this class of attacks -- used by trusted
entities (e.g., CAs) remain not auditable by relying parties, and
whenever the backdoor designer is a threat to the target users, the
security provided by illusoryTLS (i.e., none whatsoever) is not any
different from the security of systems relying upon TLS for origin
authentication, confidentiality, and message integrity guarantees.


1. illusoryTLS
illusoryTLS consists of three modules: a. a HTTPS client; b. a TLS
 server; c. a certificate store. The code is part of network-simple-tls
-- an Haskell library for simple network sockets usage patterns using 
TLS security -- and is used as-is, without any modification [NST]. 

For the sake of simplicity, and without loss of generality, the server
implements an Echo service over TLS. The client sends a basic HTTP
command over a TLS channel an awaits the server response.

From a network security perspective, the architecture of illusoryTLS is
similar to the architecture of standard Web technology, where browsers
-- or other HTTP clients -- and servers rely on database of public-key
certificates (i.e., certificate stores) as trust-anchors in the
validation of the certification paths.


2. Where is the backdoor?
There is one backdoor in illusoryTLS and it is highly robust against 
reverse-engineering. It is hidden in the public-key certificate of the
CA the communicating entities rely upon to mutually authenticate (file
path: env/certificatestore/cacert.pem).

In particular, the upper order bits of the RSA modulus encode the
asymmetric encryption of a seed generated at random. The same seed was
used to generate one of the RSA primes of the CA public-key modulus.
Hence, the RSA modulus is at the same time a RSA public key and an
asymmetric ciphertext that gives to the backdoor designer, and only to
the designer, the ability to factor with ease the said modulus.

No backdoor was slipped into the cryptographic credentials issued to
the communicating endpoints.


3. The Impact and the Implications
In turn, the backdoor designer can use the private-key recovered by 
factoring the CA public modulus to break the TLS security guarantees at
will, exposing the relying parties to a variety of attacks. They range 
from impersonation (i.e.., authentication failure), to message 
tampering (i.e., integrity erosion), to active eavesdropping of 
encrypted communications (i.e., confidentiality loss), whenever the 
attacker mounts a MITM attack.

In order to exploit the backdoor, the designer needs to retain control
over the key-generation of the target RSA modulus. However, s/he does
not need to have access to any private key used by system actors,
namely the Certification Authority and the communicating endpoints.
Hence, the attacker does not need to purloin code or data from the work
environment (i.e., the attack works without any need to tamper with the
communicating endpoints).

As long as the implementations of RSA -- or, more generally, algorithms
vulnerable to this class of attacks -- used by trusted entities (e.g.,
Certification Authorities) remain not auditable by relying parties
(e.g., X.509 end-entities), any trust-anchor for the same trusted
entities (e.g., root certificate) is to be regarded as a backdoor.

That is to say that as long as the implementations of RSA used by CAs
remain not auditable by relying parties, and whenever a hypothetical
backdoor designer is a threat to the target users, the security
provided by illusoryTLS (i.e., none whatsoever) is not any different
from the security of systems relying on TLS for origin authentication,
confidentiality, and message integrity guarantees.

It is also worth to note that even the presence of a single CA
certificate with a secretly embedded trapdoor in the certificate store
would render the entire TLS security fictional. In fact, the practice
of universal implicit cross-certification makes the whole PKI as weak
as its weakest link [AA14, Gu11].


4. Related Work
Adam Young and Moti Yung introduced the notion of secretly embedded 
trapdoor with universal protection (SETUP) at Crypto '96 [YY96]. The 
backdoor hidden in illusoryTLS implements this security notion. More 
specifically, it is an instance of the Young and Yung elliptic curve 
asymmetric backdoor in RSA key generation [YY]. The work by Adam Young
and Moti Yung expands on the research they published in the proceedings
of Selected Areas in Cryptography 2005 [YY05].  The same authors 
present a working implementation of their attack at 
http://www.cryptovirology.com/.


5. Nobody But Us: Security Properties
As remarked in [YY], SETUP attacks have some remarkable properties: 
  A. Asymmetry: The complete code for the backdoor does not enable
     anyone except the designer to exploit the backdoor; and 
  B  Indistinguishability: The backdoored key pairs appear to all 
     probabilistic polynomial time algorithms like genuine (i.e., 
     not backdoored) RSA key-pairs.

It is worth to note how a conventional backdoor are symmetric in
nature: the backdoor can be exploited by anyone with access to its
code. Conversely, an asymmetric backdoor, even if published, can 
only be exploited by the entity who planted it, assuming but not
conceding that its designer can enforce effective access control
on the backdoor (elliptic-cruve) private-key and on the key-recovery
system.

As such, an elliptic curve asymmetric backdoor provides an
instantiation of the concept of 'Nobody But Us' (i.e., keys only we
have) [A14, Go14].

The second property makes the backdoor highly robust against
reverse-engineering. As a matter of fact, the key pairs are
computationally indistinguishable from key-pairs with no secrely
embedded backdoor (under the ECDDH assumption).


6. Backdoor Embedding Algorithm
The backdoor embedding algorithm is as described in Chapter 10 of [YY].


7. References

 [A14] Dave Aitel, 'Nobody But Us', Daily Dave mailing list,
       https://lists.immunityinc.com/pipermail/dailydave/
       2014-April/000656.html

[AA14] Axel Arnback, Hadi Asghari, Michel Van Eeten, Niko Van Eljk,
       Security Collapse in the HTTPS Market,
       https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2673311

[Go14] Jack Goldsmith, 'Cyber Paradox: Every Offensive Weapon is a
       (Potential) Chink in Our Defense — and Vice Versa'
       http://www.lawfareblog.com/2014/04/
       cyber-paradox-every-offensive-weapon-is-a-potential-chink-
       in-our-defense-and-vice-versa/

[Gu11] Peter Gutmann, Diginotar broken arrow as a tour-de-force of PKI
       fail, Cryptography Randombit mailing list, 
       http://comments.gmane.org/
       gmane.comp.security.cryptography.randombit/1215

  [MC] Adam L. Young and Moti M. Yung, 'Malicious Cryptography,
       Exposing Cryptovirology', 2004, ISBN: 0-7645-4975-8, J. Wiley

 [NST] Renzo Carbonara, network-simple-tls, Haskell library for simple
       network sockets usage patterns using TLS security,
       https://github.com/k0001/network-simple-tls

  [YY] Adam L. Young and Moti M. Yung, 'An Elliptic Curve Asymmetric
       Backdoor in OpenSSL RSA Key Generation', Advances in 
       Cryptovirology, to apper, http://www.cryptovirology.com/

[YY05] Adam L. Young and Moti M. Yung, 'A Space Efficient Backdoor
       in RSA and its Applications'. In Bart Preneel and Stafford E. 
       Tavares, editors, Selected Areas in Cryptography -- '05, 
       pp 128-143, Spring, 2005, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 
       No. 3897.

[YY96] Adam L. Young and Moti M. Yung, 'The Dark Side of Black-Box
       Cryptography, or: Should we trust Capstone?'. In Advances in
       Cryptology---Crypto '96, N. Koblitz (Ed.), LNCS 1109, 
       pp. 89-103, 1996.
